CHRIS GUILLEBEAU
AND CREATE A New FuTure
A Livinc, Do Wuart You Love,
REINVENT THE Way You MakeE
STARTUP
$100
THE

waCROWN BUSINESS
CHRIS GUILLEBEAU
|tv INDIEBOUND
(Cg iBookatall
| Goggle|
AND CreaATE A New Future
A Livinc, Do Wuart You Love,
REINVENT THE Way You MAKE
BOOKSELLERS |
BARNES&-NOBLE
iced
STARTUP |
an
$]O O
|
amazoncom
(
at one of these retailers:
THE $100 STARTUP
Purchase a copy of

PROPERTY OF RANDOM HOUSE, INC.
NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION
PROPERTY OF RANDOM HOUSE, INC.
NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION
More Praise for
THE $100 STARTUP
More Praise for
aeORa
“With traditional career doors slamming shut, it’s easy to panic, but
Chris Guillebeau sees opportunities everywhere. Making a career
out ofyour passion sounds like a dream, but in this straight-
forward, engaging book he shows you how to get it done, one
simple step at a time.”
“With traditional career doors slamming shut, it’s easy to panic, but
Chris Guillebeau sees opportunities everywhere. Making a career
out of your passion sounds like a dream, but in this straight-
forward, engaging book he shows you how to get it done, one
simple step at a time.”
—Alan Paul, author of Big in China
—Alan Paul, author of Big in China
“Business, like traveling, is often improved by starting poor. You
are forced to improvise, innovate, and stay close to reality. You can’t
buy solutions, so you have to create your own. Suddenly you have
the first part ofsuccess—something ofvalue. I got all this from The
$100 Startup, which is full of practical advice about inventing
your own livelihood. ve done a handful of$100 startups myself,
several ofwhich I later sold. Chris Guillebeau knows what he is
talking about. Listen to this book!
—Kevin Kelly, author of What Technology Wants
“Business, like traveling, is often improved by starting poor. You
are forced to improvise, innovate, and stay close to reality. You can’t
buy solutions, so you have to create your own. Suddenly you have
the ﬁ rst part of success—something of value. I got all this from The
$100 Startup, which is full of practical advice about inventing
your own livelihood. I’ve done a handful of $100 startups myself,
several of which I later sold. Chris Guillebeau knows what he is
talking about. Listen to this book!
—Kevin Kelly, author of What Technology Wants
“This book is more than a ‘how to’ guide, it’s a ‘how they
did it’ guide that should persuade anyone thinking about
starting a business that they don’t need a fortune to make
one.”
“This book is more than a ‘how to’ guide, it’s a ‘how they
did it’ guide that should persuade anyone thinking about
starting a business that they don’t need a fortune to make
one.”
—John Jantsch, author ofDuct Tape Marketing
and The Referral Engine
—John Jantsch, author of Duct Tape Marketing
The Referral Engine
“Is
that
giant knot
in your stomach keeping you from starting
“Is that giant knot in your stomach keeping you from starting
your own business or pursuing the career of your dreams? Chris
Guillebeau’s seasoned, practical advice and his efﬁ cient
blueprint for entrepreneurial success will alleviate your
will
alleviate your
anxieties and get you on the path to being responsible for—
and in control of—your future.”
—Erin Doland, editor-in-chief ofUnclutterer.com
and author of Unclutter Your Life in One Week
—Erin Doland, editor-in-chief
Unclutterer.com
and author of Unclutter Your Life in One Week
your own business or pursuing the career of your dreams? Chris
Guillebeau’s seasoned, practical advice and his efficient
blueprint for entrepreneurial success
anxieties and get you on the path to being responsible for—
and in control of—your future.”
CROWN BUSINESS ©2012
CROWN BUSINESS © 2012

PROPERTY OF RANDOM HOUSE, INC.
NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION
“You can’t grow a thriving business on wishes and dreams. You
need the kind of nuts-and-bolts wisdom that only comes from
hard-earned experience. Chris Guillebeau has been in the
trenches for years, and in The $100 Startup he guides you
step-by-step through how he and dozens of others have
turned their passions into proﬁ ts. It’s essential reading for
the solopreneur!”
—Todd Henry, author of The Accidental Creative
“Starting your own business doesn’t have to be expensive or
difﬁ cult. Follow Chris’s advice, and you’ll help people, have
fun, and never work for ‘the man’ again.”
—Josh Kaufman, author of The Personal MBA:
Master the Art of Business
CROWN BUSINESS © 2012

PROPERTY OF RANDOM HOUSE, INC.
NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION
Copyright © 2012 by Chris Guillebeau
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Crown Business, an imprint of the Crown Publishing
Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.
www.crownpublishing.com
CROWN BUSINESS is a trademark and CROWN and the Rising Sun colophon are
registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.
Crown Business books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases for sales
promotions or corporate use. Special editions, including personalized covers, excerpts
of existing books, or books with corporate logos, can be created in large quantities for
special needs. For more information, contact Premium Sales at (212) 572-2232 or e- mail
specialmarkets@randomhouse.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Guillebeau, Chris.
The $100 startup : reinvent the way you make a living, do what you love, and create a new
future / by Chris Guillebeau.
p. cm.
1. New business enterprises—Management. 2. Entrepreneurship. I. Title.
II. Title: One hundred dollar startup.
HD62.5.G854 2012
658.1'1—dc23
2012003093
ISBN 978-0-307-95152-6
eISBN 978-0-307-95154-0
Printed in the United States of America
Book design: Helene Berinsky
Illustrations: Mike Rohde
Jacket design: Michael Nagin
Jacket photography: Comstock/Getty Images
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
First Edition
CROWN BUSINESS © 2012

PROLOGUE
Manifesto
A SHORT GUIDE TO EVERYTHING YOU WANT
I
magine a life where all your time is spent on the things you want
to do.
Imagine giving your greatest attention to a project you create
yourself, instead of working as a cog in a machine that exists to
make other people rich.
Imagine handing a letter to your boss that reads, “Dear Boss, I’m
writing to let you know that your services are no longer required.
Thanks for everything, but I’ll be doing things my own way now.”
Imagine that today is your ﬁ nal day of working for anyone other
than yourself. What if— very soon, not in some distant, undeﬁ ned
future— you prepare for work by ﬁ ring up a laptop in your home
ofﬁ ce, walking into a storefront you’ve opened, phoning a client
who trusts you for helpful advice, or otherwise doing what you want
instead of what someone tells you to do?
All over the world, and in many different ways, thousands of
people are doing exactly that. They are rewriting the rules of work,
becoming their own bosses, and creating a new future.
XIII

XIV
THE $100 STARTUP
This new model of doing business is well under way for these
unexpected entrepreneurs, most of whom have never thought of
themselves as businessmen and businesswomen. It’s a microbusiness
revolution— a way of earning a good living while crafting a life of
independence and purpose.
Other books chronicle the rise of Internet startups, complete
with rants about venture capital and tales of in- house organic res-
taurants. Other guides tell you how to write eighty- page business
plans that no one will ever read and that don’t resemble how an
actual business operates anyway.
This book is different, and it has two key themes: freedom and
value. Freedom is what we’re all looking for, and value is the way to
achieve it.
Stumbling onto Freedom
More than a decade ago, I began a lifelong journey of self- employ-
ment by any means necessary. I never planned to be an entrepre-
neur; I just didn’t want to work for someone else. From a cheap
apartment in Memphis, Tennessee, I watched what other people
had done and tried to reverse-engineer their success. I started by
importing coffee from Jamaica, selling it online because I saw other
people making money from it; I didn’t have any special skills in
importing, roasting, or selling. (I did, however, consume much of
the product through frequent “testing.”)
If I needed money, I learned to think in terms of how I could get
what I needed by making something and selling it, not by cutting
costs elsewhere or working for someone else. This distinction was
critical, because most budgets start by looking at income and then
deﬁ ning the available choices. I did it differently— starting with a list
of what I wanted to do, and then ﬁ guring out how to make it happen.

MANIFESTO
XV
The income from the business didn’t make me rich, but it paid
the bills and brought me something much more valuable than
money: freedom. I had no schedule to abide by, no time sheets to
ﬁ ll out, no useless reports to hand in, no ofﬁ ce politics, and not even
any mandatory meetings to attend.
I spent some of my time learning how a real business works, but
I didn’t let it interfere with a busy schedule of reading in cafés dur-
ing the day and freelancing as a jazz musician at night.
Looking for a way to contribute something greater to the world,
I moved to West Africa and spent four years volunteering with a
medical charity, driving Land Rovers packed with supplies to clin-
ics throughout Sierra Leone and Liberia. I learned how freedom
is connected to responsibility, and how I could combine my desire
for independence with something that helped the rest of the world.
After returning to the United States, I developed a career as a
writer in the same way I learned to do everything else: starting with
an idea, then ﬁ guring everything else out along the way. I began
a journey to visit every country in the world, traveling to twenty
countries a year and operating my business wherever I went. At
each step along the way, the value of freedom has been a constant
compass.
There’s no rehab program for being addicted to freedom. Once
you’ve seen what it’s like on the other side, good luck trying to fol-
low someone else’s rules ever again.
The Value Doctrine
The second part of this book is about value, a word that is often
used but rarely analyzed. As we’ll consider it, value is created when
a person makes something useful and shares it with the world. The
people whose stories you’ll read in this book have succeeded because

XVI
THE $100 STARTUP
of the value they’ve created. Often, the combination of freedom and
value comes about when someone takes action on something he or
she loves to do anyway: a hobby, skill, or passion that that person
ends up transforming into a business model.
The microbusiness revolution is happening all around us as
people say “thanks but no thanks” to traditional work, choosing
to chart their own course and create their own future. Small busi-
nesses aren’t new, but never before have so many possibilities come
together in the right place at the right time. Access to technology
has increased greatly, and costs have gone down greatly. You can
test-market your idea instantly, without waiting for months to
gauge how prospects will respond to an offer. You can open a Pay-
Pal account in ﬁ ve minutes and receive funds from buyers in more
than 180 countries.
Even better, as you build a community of loyal customers, you’ll
know well in advance what to make for them and how likely you are
to be successful without investing a lot of money. In fact, the more
you understand how your skills and knowledge can be useful to oth-
ers, the more your odds of success will go up.
Perhaps most important, the vital career question of what is
risky and what is safe has changed permanently. The old choice was
to work at a job or take a big risk going out on your own. The new
reality is that working at a job may be the far riskier choice. Instead,
take the safe road and go out on your own.
What if you could achieve your own life of freedom by bypassing
everything you thought was a prerequisite? Instead of borrowing
money, you just start— right now— without a lot of money. Instead
of hiring employees, you begin a project by yourself, based on your
speciﬁ c personal combination of passion and skill. Instead of going
to business school (which doesn’t actually train people to operate a
small business), you save the $60,000 in tuition and learn as you go.

MANIFESTO
XVII
Remember, this book isn’t about founding a big Internet startup,
and it isn’t about opening a traditional business by putting on a
suit and begging for money at the bank. Instead, it’s the account of
people who found a way to live their dreams and make a good liv-
ing from something they cared deeply about. What if their success
could be replicated? What if there was a master plan you could fol-
low, learning from those who have made it happen?
It’s a Blueprint, Not a Vague Series of Ideas
I’ll share more of my own story as we go along, but this book isn’t
about me— it’s about other people who have found freedom, and
how you can do the same thing. During an unconventional book
tour, I traveled to sixty- three cities in the United States and Canada
(and eventually more than ﬁ fteen additional countries), meeting
with people who had made the switch from working for The Man
to working for themselves.
I then worked with a small team to create a comprehensive,
multiyear study involving more than a hundred interview sub-
jects. Combing through reams of data (more than four thousand
pages of written survey answers in addition to hundreds of phone
calls, Skype sessions, and back- and- forth emails), I compiled the
most important lessons, which are offered here for your review and
action. This blueprint to freedom is fully customizable and highly
actionable. At many points along the way, you’ll have a chance to
pause and work on your own plan before continuing to learn more
about what other people have done.
A few of the people in the study are natural- born renegades,
determined to go it alone from young adulthood onward, but most
are ordinary people who had no intention of working on their own
until later in life. Several had been laid off or ﬁ red from a job and

XVIII
THE $100 STARTUP
suddenly had to ﬁ nd a way to pay the bills or support a family. (In
almost all these cases, they said something like, “Losing my job was
the best thing that ever happened to me. If I hadn’t been pushed, I
never would have made the leap.”)
Make no mistake: The blueprint does not tell you how to do less
work; it tells you how to do better work. The goal isn’t to get rich
quickly but to build something that other people will value enough
to pay for. You’re not just creating a job for yourself; you’re crafting
a legacy.
This blueprint does not involve secrets, shortcuts, or gimmicks.
There are no visualization exercises here. If you think you can
manifest your way to money simply by thinking about it, put this
book down and spend your time doing that. Instead, this book is
all about practical things you can do to take responsibility for your
own future. Read it if you want to build something beautiful on the
road to freedom.
Can you transition to a meaningful life oriented toward some-
thing you love to do? Yes. Can you make money doing it? Yes, and
here are the stories of people who have led the way. Is there a path
you can follow for your own escape plan? Yes— here is the path. Fol-
low it to create the freedom you crave.

PART I
UNEXPECTED
ENTREPRENEURS

1 • Renaissance

YOU ALREADY HAVE THE SKILLS YOU NEED—
YOU JUST HAVE TO KNOW WHERE TO LOOK.
“The need for change bulldozed a road
down the center of my mind.”
—MAYA ANGELOU
O
n the Monday morning of May 4, 2009, Michael Hanna put
on a Nordstrom suit with a colorful tie and headed to his
ofﬁ ce building in downtown Portland, Oregon. A twenty- ﬁ ve- year
veteran sales professional, Michael spent his days attending meet-
ings, pitching clients, and constantly responding to email.
Arriving at work, he settled into his cubicle, reading the news
and checking a few emails. One of the messages was from his boss,
asking to see him later that day. The morning passed uneventfully:
more emails, phone calls, and planning for a big pitch. Michael took
a client out to lunch, stopping off for an espresso recharge on the
way back in. He returned in time to ﬁ re off a few more replies and
head to the boss’s ofﬁ ce.
Inside the ofﬁ ce, Michael took a seat and noticed that his boss
didn’t make eye contact. “After that,” he says, “everything hap-
pened in slow motion. I had heard story after story of this experi-
ence from other people, but I was always disconnected from it. I
never thought it could happen to me.”
3

4
THE $100 STARTUP
His boss mentioned the downturn in the economy, the unavoid-
able need to lose good people, and so on. An H.R. manager appeared
out of nowhere, walking Michael to his desk and handing him a
cardboard box— an actual box!—to pack up his things. Michael
wasn’t sure what to say, but he tried to put on a brave face for his
nearby colleagues. He drove home at two- thirty, thinking about
how to tell his wife, Mary Ruth, and their two children that he no
longer had a job.
After the shock wore off, Michael settled into an unfamiliar
routine, collecting unemployment checks and hunting for job leads.
The search was tough. He was highly qualiﬁ ed, but so were plenty
of other people out pounding the pavement every day. The industry
was changing, and it was far from certain that Michael could return
to a well- paying job at the same level he had worked before.
One day, a friend who owned a furniture store mentioned that
he had a truckload of closeout mattresses and no use for them.
“You could probably sell these things one at a time on Craigslist
and do pretty well,” he told Michael. The idea sounded crazy, but
nothing was happening on the job front. Michael ﬁ gured if noth-
ing else, he could at least sell the mattresses at cost. He called Mary
Ruth: “Honey, it’s a long story, but is it OK if I buy a bunch of
mattresses?”
The next step was to ﬁ nd a location to stash the goods. Hunting
around the city, Michael found a car dealership that had gone out
of business recently. Times were hard in the real estate business too,
so when Michael called the landlord to see if he could set up shop
inside the old showroom, he had a deal. The ﬁ rst inventory went
quickly through Craigslist and word of mouth, and the biggest
problem was answering questions from potential customers about
what kind of mattress they should buy. “I had no business plan
and no knowledge of mattresses,” Michael said. “My impression

RENAISSANCE
5
of mattress stores was that they were seedy, high- pressure places.
I wasn’t sure what kind of place I was trying to build, but I knew
it had to be a welcoming environment where customers weren’t
hassled.”
After the ﬁ rst experience went well, Michael took the plunge
and studied up on mattresses, talking to local suppliers and nego-
tiating with the landlord to remain in the former car showroom.
Mary Ruth built a website. The concept of a no- hard- sell mat-
tress store went over well in Portland, and business grew when the
store offered the industry’s ﬁ rst- ever mattress delivery by bicycle.
(A friend built a custom tandem bike with a platform on the back
that could hold a king- size mattress.) Customers who rode their
own bikes to the store received free delivery, a pricing tactic that
inspired loyalty and a number of fan videos uploaded to YouTube.
It wasn’t what Michael had ever expected to do, but he had built
a real business, proﬁ table right from the ﬁ rst truckload of mat-
tresses and providing enough money to support his family. On the
two- year anniversary of his abrupt departure from corporate life,
Michael was looking through his closet when he spotted the Nord-
strom suit he had worn on his last day. Over the last two years, he
hadn’t worn it— or any other professional dress clothes— a single
time. He carried the suit out to his bike, dropped it off at Goodwill,
and continued on to the mattress store. “It’s been an amazing two
years since I lost my job,” he says now. “I went from corporate guy
to mattress deliveryman, and I’ve never been happier.”
•••
Across town from Michael’s accidental mattress shop, ﬁ rst- time
entrepreneur Sarah Young was opening a yarn store around the
same time. When asked why she took the plunge at the height of
the economic downturn and with no experience running a business,

6
THE $100 STARTUP
Sarah said: “It’s not that I had no experience; I just had a differ-
ent kind of experience. I wasn’t an entrepreneur before, but I was
a shopper. I knew what I wanted, and it didn’t exist, so I built it.”
Sarah’s yarn store, proﬁ led further in Chapter 11, was proﬁ table
within six months and has inspired an international following.
Meanwhile, elsewhere around the world, others were skipping
the part about having an actual storefront, opening Internet- based
businesses at almost zero startup cost. In England, Susannah
Conway started teaching photography classes for fun and got the
surprise of her life when she made more money than she did as
a journalist. (Question: “What did you not foresee when starting
up?” Answer: “I didn’t know I was starting up!”)
Benny Lewis graduated from a university in Ireland with an engi-
neering degree, but never put it to use. Instead he found a way to make
a living as a “professional language hacker,” traveling the world and
helping students quickly learn to speak other languages. (Question:
“Is there anything else we should know about your business?” Answer:
“Yes. Stop calling it a business! I’m having the time of my life.”)
Welcome to the strange new world of micro- entrepreneurship.
In this world, operating independently from much of the other
business news you hear about, Indian bloggers make $200,000 a
year. Roaming, independent publishers operate from Buenos Aires
and Bangkok. Product launches from one- man or one- woman
businesses bring in $100,000 in a single day, causing nervous bank
managers to shut down the accounts because they don’t understand
what’s happening.
Oddly, many of these unusual businesses thrive by giving things
away, recruiting a legion of fans and followers who support their
paid work whenever it is ﬁ nally offered. “My marketing plan is stra-
tegic giving,” said Megan Hunt, who makes hand- crafted dresses
and wedding accessories in Omaha, Nebraska, shipping them all

RENAISSANCE
7
over the world. “Empowering others is our greatest marketing
effort,” said Scott Meyer from South Dakota. “We host training
sessions, give away free materials, and answer any question some-
one emails to us at no charge whatsoever.”
•••
In some ways, renegade entrepreneurs who buck the system and go
it alone are nothing new. Microbusinesses— businesses typically run
by only one person— have been around since the beginning of com-
merce. Merchants roamed the streets of ancient Athens and Rome,
hawking their wares. In many parts of rural Africa and Asia, much
commerce still takes place through small transactions and barter.
Unconventional approaches to marketing and public relations
have also been around for a while. Long before it was common, a band
had an idea for communicating directly with fans, bypassing the tra-
ditional structure of record labels as much as possible. The fans felt
like they were part of a community instead of just a crowd of ador-
ing listeners. Oh, and instead of relying primarily on album sales for
income, the band would rely on ticket sales and merchandising at an
unending series of live concerts. The example sounds like it’s happen-
ing today, but the year was 1967, and the band was the Grateful Dead.
What’s new, however, is how quickly someone can start a busi-
ness and reach a group of customers. The building process is much
faster and cheaper today than it has ever been. Going from idea to
startup can now take less than a month and cost less than $100—
just ask any of the people whose stories you’ll read in this book.
Commerce may have been around forever, but scale, reach, and
connection have changed dramatically. The handyman who does
odd jobs and repairs used to put up ﬂ yers at the grocery store; now
he advertises through Google to people searching for “kitchen cabi-
net installation” in their city.

8
THE $100 STARTUP
It’s not an elitist club; it’s a middle- class, leaderless movement.
All around the world, ordinary people are opting out of traditional
employment and making their own way. Instead of ﬁ ghting the
system, they’re creating their own form of work— usually with-
out much training, and almost always without much money. These
unexpected entrepreneurs have turned their passion into proﬁ t
while creating a more meaningful life for themselves.
What if you could do this too? What if you could have the same
freedom to set your own schedule and determine your own priori-
ties? Good news: Freedom is possible. More good news: Freedom
isn’t something to be envisioned in the vaguely distant future— the
future is now.
The $100 Startup Model
I’ve been hearing stories about unconventional businesses for at
least a decade, even as I’ve been operating a series of them myself.
Through my work as a writer and entrepreneur, I had access to
a wide circle of microbusiness case studies: proﬁ table businesses
typically run solely by one person without much in the way of
startup capital. In preparing for a comprehensive study, I began
by checking with many of my friends and colleagues, but I didn’t
stop there.
In 2010 I produced a series of workshops on low- budget busi-
ness ideas with Pamela Slim, author of Escape from Cubicle Nation.
The ﬁ rst time we announced a workshop, it sold out in ninety min-
utes. We then offered spots in another workshop that wouldn’t be
held for several months, and it sold out before lunchtime. Since
it was clear we had found a demand for this information, I dug
deeper.
While hosting the workshops, I became interested in the

RENAISSANCE
9
“follow- your- passion” model— the idea that successful small busi-
nesses are often built on the pursuit of a personal hobby or inter-
est. I conducted interviews with entrepreneurs all over the world
and documented their stories for an online course called the Empire
Building Kit. The course was the inspiration for launching the proj-
ect on a wider scale and then for writing this book.
I had a number of case studies in mind at the outset, but
in preparation for writing the book, I cast the net much wider.
I drew respondents from online and ofﬂ ine, collecting data
through a Google form that grew to thousands of data points. As
I traveled to sixty- three cities in North America on a book tour, I
kept meeting and hearing about more unconventional, accidental
entrepreneurs.
When I ﬁ nally closed the nomination process, I had more than
1,500 respondents to choose from. All of the respondents met at
least four of the following six criteria:
• Follow- your- passion model. Many people are interested in
building a business that is based on a hobby or activity they
are especially enthusiastic about. As we’ll see, not every pas-
sion leads to big bank deposits, but some certainly do.
• Low startup cost. I was interested in businesses that required
less than $1,000 in startup capital, especially those that cost
almost nothing (less than $100) to begin.
• At least $50,000 a year in net income. I wanted proﬁ table
businesses that earned at least as much as the average North
American income. As we go along, you’ll notice that the range
varies considerably, with many businesses earning healthy
six- ﬁ gure incomes or higher, but a baseline proﬁ tability level
of at least $50,000 a year was required.

10
THE $100 STARTUP
• No special skills. Since we were looking at ordinary people
who created a successful business, I had a bias toward busi-
nesses that anyone can operate. This point can be hard to
deﬁ ne, but there’s a key distinction: Many businesses require
specialized skills of some kind, but they are skills that can be
acquired through a short period of training or independent
study. You could learn to be a coffee roaster on the job, for
example, but hopefully not a dentist.
• Full ﬁ nancial disclosure. Respondents for the study agreed
to disclose their income projection for the current year and
actual income for at least the previous two years. Further-
more, they had to be willing to discuss income and expenses
in speciﬁ c terms.
• Fewer than ﬁ ve employees. For the most part, I was inter-
ested in unexpected or accidental entrepreneurs who delib-
erately chose to remain small. Many of the case studies are
from businesses operated strictly by one person, which closely
relates to the goal of personal freedom that so many respon-
dents identiﬁ ed.
I excluded businesses that were in “adult” or quasi- legal mar-
kets, and in most cases also excluded businesses that were highly
technical or required special skills to operate. The baseline test was,
“Could you explain what you do to your grandmother, and would
you be willing to?”
Next, I wanted to look at businesses started by people all over
the world. About half of our stories come from the United States,
and half come from the rest of the world. From Silicon Valley to
Atlanta, the U.S. is a hub for entrepreneurship, both in terms of
values and ease of startup. But as we’ll see, people from all over the

RENAISSANCE
11
world are creating their own microbusinesses, sometimes following
the U.S. model and other times doing it independently.
Finally, in making the last selections for the studies presented
here, I had a bias toward “interesting” stories. Not every business
needs to be sexy or trendworthy— in fact, many of the ones here
aren’t— but I liked stories that highlighted originality and creativ-
ity. Two years ago in Minneapolis, Lisa Sellman attracted my atten-
tion by telling me about her dog care business. At ﬁ rst, I didn’t
think much of it. How proﬁ table could a dog care business be? But
then Lisa told me how much money she made: $88,000 the previ-
ous year and on track to clear six ﬁ gures the next. All of a sudden I
was interested. How did Lisa do it . . . and what lessons could we
learn from her?
Each case study subject completed several detailed surveys about
his or her business, including ﬁ nancial data and demographics, in
addition to dozens of open- ended questions. The group surveys
were followed up with further individual questions in hundreds of
emails, phone calls, Skype video calls, and in- person meetings in
ﬁ fteen cities around the world. My goal was to create a narrative by
ﬁ nding common themes among a diverse group. The collected data
would be enough for several thick books by itself, but I’ve tried to
present only the most important information here. You can learn
more about the methodology for the study, including survey data
and speciﬁ c interviews, at 100startup.com.
•••
In other studies, books, and media coverage, two kinds of business
models get most of the attention. Business model number one is
old- school: An inventor gets an idea and persuades the bank to lend
her money for a growing operation, or a company spins off a divi-
sion to create another company. Most corporations traded on the

12
THE $100 STARTUP
stock market ﬁ t this category. Business model number two is the
investment- driven startup, which is typically focused on venture
capital, buyouts, advertising, and market share. The business is ini-
tiated by a founder or small group of partners, but often run by a
management team, reporting to a board of directors who seek to
increase the business’s valuation with the goal of “going public” or
being acquired.
Each of the older models has strengths, weaknesses, and various
other characteristics. In both of them, there is no shortage of suc-
cess and failure stories. But these models and their stories are not
our concern here. While business models number one and number
two have been getting all the attention, something else has been
happening quietly— something completely different.
Our story is about people who start their own microbusinesses
without investment, without employees, and often without much
of an idea of what they’re doing. They almost never have a formal
business plan, and they often don’t have a plan at all besides “Try
this out and see what happens.” More often than not, the business
launches quickly, without waiting for permission from a board or
manager. Market testing happens on the ﬂ y. “Are customers buy-
ing?” If the answer is yes, good. If no, what can we do differently?
Like Michael’s progression from corporate guy to mattress
bicyclist, many of our case studies started businesses accidentally
after experiencing a hardship such as losing a job. In Massachu-
setts, Jessica Reagan Salzman’s husband called from work to say
he was coming home early— and he wouldn’t be going back to the
ofﬁ ce the next day. The unexpected layoff catapulted Jessica, new
mother to a three- week- old, into action. Her part- time bookkeep-
ing “hobby” became the family’s full- time income. In Pennsylva-
nia, Tara Gentile started her business with the goal of being able to

RENAISSANCE
13
work from home while caring for her children; the business grew so
quickly that her husband ended up staying home too.
Across the Atlantic, David Henzell was a director for the largest
advertising agency outside London. He left in part because he was
bored with the work, and in part because of a diagnosis of chronic
fatigue syndrome that left him struggling with “chronic director
responsibilities.” In his new company, Lightbulb Design, he makes
the rules. “For a while the illness managed me,” he said, “but now I
manage it. Lightbulb started as a way for me to make a living on my
terms. It’s still on my terms, but now we are kicking ass!”
The people we’ll meet vary considerably in the ways they chose
to structure their projects. Some eventually opted for expansion,
either by hiring or building teams of “virtual assistants.” Erica
Cosminsky grew her transcription team to seventeen people at one
point, but by working with contractors instead of hiring employ-
ees, she retained the freedom to keep things simple. The Tom Bihn
luggage factory in Seattle grew to a seven- ﬁ gure operation, while
remaining completely independent and turning down offers to sell
its line to big- box stores.
Others pursued partnerships that allowed each person to focus
on what he or she was best at. Fresh out of design school and disil-
lusioned with their entry- level jobs, Jen Adrion and Omar Noory
began selling custom- made maps out of an apartment in Columbus,
Ohio. Patrick McCrann and Rich Strauss were competitors who
teamed up to create a community for endurance athletes. Several of
our stories are about married couples or partners building a busi-
ness together.
But many others chose to go it alone, with the conviction that
they would ﬁ nd freedom by working primarily by themselves.
Charlie Pabst was a successful architect with a “dream job” as a

14
THE $100 STARTUP
store designer for Starbucks. But the desire for autonomy overcame
the comfort of the dream job and the free lattes: “One day I drove
to work and realized I couldn’t do it anymore, called in sick, drafted
my two- week notice, and the rest is history.” Charlie still works as
a designer, but now he works from home for clients of his choosing.
We’ll view these stories as an ensemble: a group of individual
voices that, when considered together, comprise an original com-
position. In sharing how different people have set themselves free
from corporate misery, the challenge is to acknowledge their cour-
age without exaggerating their skills. Most of them aren’t geniuses
or natural- born entrepreneurs; they are ordinary people who made
a few key decisions that changed their lives. Very few of our case
studies went to business school, and more than half had no previ-
ous business experience whatsoever. Several dropped out of col-
lege, and others never went in the ﬁ rst place.*
In sharing these stories, the goal is to provide a blueprint for
freedom, a plan you can use to apply their lessons to your own
escape plan. Throughout the case studies, three lessons of micro-
entrepreneurship emerge. We’ll focus on these lessons in various
ways throughout the book.
Lesson 1: Convergence
As we’ll examine it, convergence represents the intersection between
something you especially like to do or are good at doing (preferably
both) and what other people are also interested in. The easiest way
to understand convergence is to think of it as the overlapping space
*Jeremy Brown attended two years of technical school but left without graduating. After he
founded a successful company, the school invited him back to speak to students as a “success
story,” not realizing that his success had come from leaving the program to go out on his own.
“The speech was a little awkward,” he says, “but the students liked it.”

Your
passion
RENAISSANCE
15
between what you care about and what other people are willing to
spend money on.
Consider these circles:
convergence
Not everything that you are passionate about or skilled in is
interesting to the rest of the world, and not everything is market-
able. I can be very passionate about eating pizza, but no one is going
to pay me to do it. Likewise, any individual person won’t be able to
provide a solution to every problem or be interesting to everyone.
But in the overlap between the two circles, where passion or skill
meets usefulness, a microbusiness built on freedom and value can
thrive.
Lesson 2: Skill Transformation
Many of the projects we’ll examine were started by people with
related skills, not necessarily the skill most used in the project.
For example, teachers are usually good at more than just teaching;
they’re also good at things such as communication, adaptability,
crowd control, lesson planning, and coordinating among differ-
ent interest groups (children, parents, administrators, colleagues).
Teaching is a noble career on its own, but these skills can also be put
to good use in building a business.
The easiest way to understand skill transformation is to realize

16
THE $100 STARTUP
that you’re probably good at more than one thing. Originally from
Germany, Kat Alder was waitressing in London when someone said
to her, “You know, you’d be really good at PR.” Kat didn’t know
anything about PR— she wasn’t even sure it stood for “public rela-
tions”—but she knew she was a good waitress, always getting good
tips and making her customers happy by recommending items from
the menu that she was sure they would like.
After she was let go from another temporary job at the BBC, she
thought back on the conversation. She still didn’t know much about
the PR industry, but she landed her ﬁ rst client within a month and
ﬁ gured it out. Four years later, her ﬁ rm employs ﬁ ve people and
operates in London, Berlin, New York, and China. Kat was a great
waitress and learned to apply similar “people skills” to publicizing
her clients, creating a business that was more proﬁ table, sustainable,
and fun than working for someone else and endlessly repeating the
list of daily specials.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, success in entrepreneurship
isn’t necessarily related to being the best at any particular activity.
Scott Adams, the creator of the Dilbert comic series, explains his
success this way:
I succeeded as a cartoonist with negligible art talent, some basic
writing skills, an ordinary sense of humor and a bit of experi-
ence in the business world. The “Dilbert” comic is a combina-
tion of all four skills. The world has plenty of better artists,
smarter writers, funnier humorists and more experienced busi-
ness people. The rare part is that each of those modest skills is
collected in one person. That’s how value is created.*
*Scott Adams, “How to Get a Real Education at College,” The Wall Street Journal, April 9,
2011.

RENAISSANCE
17
To succeed in a business project, especially one you’re excited
about, it helps to think carefully about all the skills you have that
could be helpful to others and particularly about the combination
of those skills.
Lesson 3: The Magic Formula
Bringing the ﬁ rst two ideas together, here is the not- so- secret rec-
ipe for microbusiness alchemy:
Passion or skill + usefulness = success
Throughout the book, we’ll examine case studies by referring
to this formula. Jaden Hair forged a career as the host of Steamy
Kitchen, a cooking show and website featuring Asian cuisine. From
an initial investment of $200, cookbooks, TV offers, and corporate
sponsorship have all come her way due to the merging of passion
and usefulness. The recipes Jaden shares with a large community
on a daily basis are easy, healthy, and very popular— when I met her
at an event she was hosting in Austin, I could barely get through
the throngs of admirers to say hi. (Read more of Jaden’s story in
Chapter 2.)
Elsewhere, Brandon Pearce was a piano teacher struggling to
keep up with the administrative side of his work. A programming
hobbyist, he created software to help track his students, scheduling,
and payment. “I did the whole project with no intention of making
it into a business,” he said. “But then other teachers started show-
ing interest, and I thought maybe I could make a few extra bucks
with it.” The few extra bucks turned into a full- time income and
more, with current income in excess of $30,000 a month. A native
of Utah, Brandon now lives with his family at their second home in

18
THE $100 STARTUP
Costa Rica when they aren’t exploring the rest of the world. (Read
more of Brandon’s story in Chapter 4.)
The Road Ahead: What We’ll Learn
In the quest for freedom, we’ll look at the nuts and bolts of build-
ing a microbusiness through the lens of those who have done it.
The basics of starting a business are very simple; you don’t need an
MBA (keep the $60,000 tuition), venture capital, or even a detailed
plan. You just need a product or service, a group of people willing
to pay for it, and a way to get paid. This can be broken down as
follows:
1. Product or service: what you sell
2. People willing to pay for it: your customers
3. A way to get paid: how you’ll exchange a product or service
for money
If you have a group of interested people but nothing to sell, you
don’t have a business. If you have something to sell but no one will-
ing to buy it, you don’t have a business. In both cases, without a clear
and easy way for customers to pay for what you offer, you don’t have
a business. Put the three together, and congratulations— you’re
now an entrepreneur.
These are the bare bones of any project; there’s no need to over-
complicate things. But to look at it more closely, it helps to have an
offer: a combination of product or service plus the messaging that
makes a case to potential buyers. The initial work can be a chal-
lenge, but after the typical business gets going, you can usually take
a number of steps to ramp up sales and income— if you want to. It
helps to have a strategy of building interest and attracting attention,

RENAISSANCE
19
described here as hustling. Instead of just popping up one day with
an offer, it helps to craft a launch event to get buyers excited ahead
of time.
We’ll look at each of these concepts in precise detail, down to
dollars- and- cents ﬁ gures from those who have gone before. The
goal is to explain what people have done that works and closely
examine how it can be replicated elsewhere. The lessons and case
studies illustrate a business- creation method that has worked many
times over: Build something that people want and give it to them.
There’s no failproof method; in fact, failure is often the best
teacher. Along the way, we’ll meet an artist whose studio collapsed
underneath him as he stood on the roof, frantically shoveling snow.
We’ll see how an adventure travel provider recovered after hearing
that the South Paciﬁ c island they were taking guests to the next
morning was no longer receiving visitors. Sometimes the challenge
comes from too much business instead of too little: In Chicago,
we’ll see what happens when a business struggles under the weight
of an unexpected two thousand new customers in a single day. We’ll
study how these and other brave entrepreneurs forged ahead and
kept going, turning potential disasters into long- term successes.
•••
The constant themes in our study are freedom and value, but the
undercurrent to both is the theme of change. From his home base
in Seattle, James Kirk used to build and manage computer data
centers around the country. But in an act of conviction that took
less than six months from idea to execution, he packed up a 2006
Mustang and left Seattle for South Carolina, on a mission to start
an authentic coffee shop in the land of biscuits and iced tea. Once
he made the decision, he says, all other options were closed: “There
was one moment very early on when I realized, this is what I want

20
THE $100 STARTUP
to do, and this is what I am going to do. And that was that. Decision
made. I’ll ﬁ gure the rest out.”
As we’ll see, James later got serious about making a real plan,
but the more important step was the decision to proceed. Ready or
not, he was heading for a major change, and it couldn’t come soon
enough. A few short months later, Jamestown Coffee opened for
business in Lexington, South Carolina. James and his new staff had
worked ten- hour days for several weeks to prepare for the opening.
But there it was: a ribbon to be cut, the mayor on hand to welcome
the business to the community, and a line of customers eager to
sample the wares. The day had come at last, and there was no look-
ing back.
KEY POINTS
• Microbusinesses aren’t new; they’ve been around since the begin-
ning of commerce. What’s changed, however, is the ability to test,
launch, and scale your project quickly and on the cheap.
• To start a business, you need three things: a product or service, a
group of people willing to pay for it, and a way to get paid. Everything
else is completely optional.
• If you’re good at one thing, you’re probably good at other things too.
Many projects begin through a process of “skill transformation,” in
which you apply your knowledge to a related topic.
• Most important: merge your passion and skill with something that is
useful to other people.

Purchase a copy of
THE $100 STARTUP
at one of these retailers:
iced
$]O O
|
(
amazoncom
STARTUP |
an
REINVENT THE Way You MAKE
A Livinc, Do Wuart You Love,
AND CreaATE A New Future
BARNES&-NOBLE
BOOKSELLERS |
| Goggle|
(Cg iBookatall
|tv INDIEBOUND
CHRIS GUILLEBEAU
waCROWN BUSINESS
